On March 16, 1968, soldiers entered a small village in Southeast Asia and killed hundreds of people.
One of those soldiers, reflecting on events that were later declared a war crime, said this.
I can't forgive myself for the things I did.
Another soldier who participated in the same tragedy said this.
I carried out the orders that I was given, and I do not feel wrong in doing so.
How is it that two humans, both created in God's image, could respond so differently to the same experience?
The answer has to do with the conscience and its training.
The Bible teaches that all humans have a conscience, a capacity for looking at oneself and rendering judgment about one's own behavior.
This is true even if a person knows nothing about God's law.
According to Romans chapter 2 and verse 15, because all humans have an inborn sense of right and wrong, their conscience is bearing witness with them, and by their own thoughts they are being accused or even excused.
That was quite evident in the expressions of those two soldiers.
One was accused by his conscience, the other was excused.
But what does this have to do with us?
Clearly, not all consciences operate properly.
Only a conscience that is trained by God's word and that is sensitive to God's will can correctly judge matters.
In biblical terms, a person, even a Christian, one of us, can have a conscience that's weak, one that's seared, or one that's defiled.
No wonder then that the Apostle Paul, according to Acts chapter 24 and verse 16, made it his goal to maintain a clear conscience before God and men.
And that's what we want to do as well, isn't it?
This morning, let's consider the theme, be transformed by training the conscience.
It's good to remember that our conscience can function at different levels.
This morning, let's use a few Bible examples to identify four levels ranging from basic to advanced with regard to the use of the conscience.
Doing so may help us see ways in which we can further develop our God-given conscience.
First, what's a level one conscience entry level?
Well, this is a conscience that operates like a judge and accuses us when we do wrong.
Describing this basic function of the conscience, a seven-year-old described it this way, when you're good, you don't know you have it, but when you're bad, it hurts.
I'll think of Adam and Eve.
In Genesis chapter 3 and verse 7, after sinning, their eyes were open, the Bible tells us, they realized they were naked, they felt shame, and they made loin coverings for themselves, and then what did they do?
They hid from Jehovah among the trees.
Verse 11 of Genesis 3, Jehovah asked, who told you that you were naked?
Adam did not answer that question directly, but we know the answer.
Their guilty consciences were talking, were judging them, accusing them.
Even Judas had a conscience, level one conscience, but sadly he never developed it further.
Matthew chapter 27 and verse 3 says he felt remorse. His conscience accused him, but it did not move him to seek God's forgiveness.
Adam, Eve, and Judas all had a conscience, but at what level was it operating?
Very basic.
What then is a level 2 conscience?
Well, this is a conscience that moves a person who has made a mistake to repair his relationship with Jehovah.
An event in David's life illustrates this.
You might want to open your Bible to 1 Samuel, chapter 24 and verse 4, and follow the account.
As a fugitive fleeing from King Saul at 1 Samuel 24, we hear that David and his men were hiding at the back of a cave, and then who walks in?
Saul, not knowing that David and his men were there.
Suddenly David was in a position to do something disrespectful toward God's anointed King, and he did something disrespectful.
At the urging of his men, David rose up and quietly cut off the edge of Saul's sleeveless coat.
What happened next?
For Samuel 24 verse 5 says, afterward David's heart kept striking him.
His conscience accused him, but it did more.
After sinning, it steered him away from the sin and prevented him from repeating it or doing something worse.
How good when we've developed our conscience to that degree, moving us to repair our relationship with Jehovah when necessary.
Well, what more can the conscience do for us?
Let's consider a level 3 conscience, one that helps us avoid a sinful course in the first place.
A Bible example that readily comes to mind is that of Joseph and his encounter with Potiphar's wife.
According to Genesis chapter 39 and verse 9, not only did Joseph identify adultery as a great badness and as a sin against God, but his conscience moved him to flee from the situation, flee from sinning.
Joseph's prompt response to his God-oriented conscience moved him to avoid the calamity altogether and his horrible consequences.
Job's conscience operated in a similar way. At Job 31-1, he said, I have made a covenant with my eyes, so how could I show improper attention to a virgin?
Obviously, Job's conscience was functioning well. It helped him to be careful about his behavior with the opposite sex.
Interestingly, in Job's case and in Joseph's case, both made decisions that reflected Jehovah's thinking even though there was no specific law against adultery.
Their consciences were doing more for them than the consciences of Adam even Judas. Their consciences helped them to live up to Jehovah's thinking his standards by steering them away from sin.
How thankful we can be when our conscience does the same.
But that raises another question. Can the conscience do even more for us?
Yes. Consider what we'll call a level 4 advanced conscience by reading 1 Timothy, chapter 1 and verse 5, please.
1 Timothy, chapter 1 and verse 5.
Really, the objective of this instruction is love out of a clean heart and out of a good conscience and out of faith without hypocrisy.
Here the Bible associates a good conscience with what? Faith and love. What is this teaching us?
Not only can our conscience keep us from violating God's laws, but it can move us to do loving things, good things and for the right reasons.
This would include helping us to be transformed as we read in our day text to be the type of person Jehovah wants us to be every day.
Think of the potential for love and good that Jehovah sees in you and that he sees in me.
Our Bible trained conscience when we respond to it can help us reflect God's image more fully.
Certainly Jesus is the foremost example of a human who developed and responded to his conscience to this degree.
Do you recall how he responded to crowds of needy people even when he was tired?
Mark 634 tells us that he was moved with pity for them and he started to teach them many things.
While this was one of many examples that shows that Jesus' conscience was moving him to do kind and loving things to help others and to glorify his father.
Well, what's the point of instruction for us?
The watchtower of September 1st, 1976 in the article, training our conscience to do more for us said this, I quote.
It must be remembered that the conscience is not simply a mental activity, but a reflection of the moral nature of the whole person.
The conscience must do more than tell us what we ought to be, it must identify what we are in real life, end of quote.
Clearly, in the case of Jesus, our example, our exemplar, his conscience reflected who he really was at heart, a lover of Jehovah, a lover of Jehovah standards, and a lover of people.
The same can be true of us.
Well, in summary, what do we learn?
Two points. First, to be a reliable guide, our conscience must be trained by God's word and it must be sensitive to His will.
And second, a trained conscience can do more than accuse or excuse us. It can move us to be the person Jehovah wants us to be.
May all of us be transformed by training our conscience.